American Experience with
captioning is made possible
by the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
to enhance public understanding
of the role of technology.
The foundation also seeks
to portray the lives
of the men and women engaged
in scientific
and technological pursuit.
At the Scotts Company, we help
make gardens more beautiful,
lawns greener, trees taller.
If there's a better business
to be in,
please... let us know.
Liberty Mutual Insurance
is a proud supporter
of The American Experience.
And by helping people live
safer, more secure lives,
we're also proud supporters
of the American dream.
This program has been made
possible by a grant from:
And by:
American Experience
is also made possible
by the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and contributions
to your PBS station from:
( chanting ):
Alabama! Alabama!
( music begins playing )
BEACH BOYS:
♪ Shalla-la-li-da, oo, yah-yah ♪
WILSON:
♪ Little girl
with heart of gold... ♪
♪ You're my Miss America ♪
♪ Little girl
with lips untold... ♪
♪ You're my Miss America ♪
♪ Blue eyes... blonde hair,
just like a movie star ♪
♪ Shalla-la-li-da,
oo, yah-yah... ♪
ANNOUNCER:
You can have wars
and atom bombs,
but, so it seems, there must
always be a Miss America.
ANNOUNCER:
Just one4A,E.Dyoung girl
receives top honors
as Miss America.
So democracy works here, too,
for the Atlantic City
Miss America contest
is predicated on the conviction
that the typical American girl
has talent and brains
as well as beauty.
WOMAN:
I think the Miss America Pageant
has been about the American
dream for some women.
It has been about a dream
of being beautiful.
It's also been about a dream
of being successful.
And that combination
is, I think,
the kind of complicated stew
that is very much American
women's experience
of the last 80 years.
I am tingling with excitement
wondering who will be
the next Miss America.
MAN:
When my kids were little, one
of the big nights of the year
was just the four of us
sitting there
watching the Miss America...
and saying,
"Oh, she's got to win."
And you root and you got
involved in it.
And we all loved it;
it was a part of our lives.
You know, in this 20th century,
we have witnessed
the birth of a legend,
the legend of the American girl.
WOMAN:
I think it's a really important
story to tell
because it's about how we feel
about ourselves as women
and how we've changed as women
and who we are as women,
and what it means
to be judged by men.
ANNOUNCER:
There are beauty contests
and beauty contests,
and then there's
the Miss America competition
and this year's crop seems to be
the most beauteous bevy
of breathtaking beauties
in decades.
WOMAN:
The pageant is this example
where you can be sort
of nationalistic and patriotic
and pro-American and get
to see some T and A
all in the same event.
The thing about the pageant
is that you have to have
a sense of humor about it.
I mean, you've got girls who
have invested their entire lives
in wanting to become
Miss America.
On the one hand,
it's this investment
of thousands of dollars
in this huge goal,
and on the other hand,
a girl is spray-gluing
her swimsuit to her butt
so it doesn't ride up.
You know,
this is like Miss America.
I mean, it's not
"Miss Coffee Beans."
It's not
"Miss Peach Blossoms."
This is the woman that
sort of represents the country
like the President does.
And so it's seeing what
is the way to be
the woman of the most powerful
country on Earth.
ANNOUNCER:
These were the fabulous,
furious roaring '20s
and this is why they roared.
NARRATOR:
The Miss America Pageant started
out as a promotional gimmick
dreamed up by Atlantic City
businessmen in 1921
as a way to keep tourists
in town after Labor Day.
Over the next eight decades,
it would become
a national tradition
dedicated to defining
the ideal American woman.
MAN:
♪ My darling, my duchess,
you sweet so and so... ♪
NARRATOR:
Year after year, the Miss
America Pageant would struggle
to pull off
a delicate balancing act:
Objectifying women
while providing them
with real opportunities;
promoting traditional roles
while encouraging
women's independence;
glorifying feminine modesty
while trading
on female sexuality.
Along the way,
it would come to be a barometer
of the nation's shifting ideas
about American womanhood.
But in 1921,
Atlantic City's businessmen were
simply trying to turn a profit
by capitalizing on the country's
fascination with beauty.
WOMAN:
There are many
beauty pageants in the 1920s,
and they range from pageants
oriented towards
African-American women,
Miss Bronze America.
Even the Ku Klux Klan
has a beauty pageant
for Miss 100% America.
So there's something
about beauty as a symbol
that is extremely important
and many different groups are
getting together and saying,
"We have the most beautiful
woman who represents us."
And Miss America
is the national symbol
of what is going on
all over the country.
NARRATOR:
The first Miss America Pageant
was a spectacular
two-day festival
culminating with
a beach-front parade
called the "Bather's Revue."
The only rule
for the competition
was that all participants
must positively be attired
in bathing costumes.
A board of censors
had been appointed
to review questionable entries.
WOMAN:
Atlantic City was a place
where everybody was kind of
given to letting your hair down
and having a delicious,
romantic time.
Bathing suits
had changed a great deal
and stockings were now being
rolled beneath your knees,
which was very daring.
And women had to have
their bathing suits
at a certain length.
And so there were beach censors
who would actually come down
and measure the length
of your bathing suit.
NARRATOR:
On the morning of the Revue,
more than 100,000 people
swarmed onto the Boardwalk,
hoping to catch a glimpse
of the scantily-clad young women
down on the sand.
The spectators'
stand-out favorite
was a slight,
freckled 16-year-old
from the nation's capitol,
named Margaret Gorman.
MAN:
Margaret Gorman was a sensation.
She was tiny, petite, five-one,
with blonde, long ringlets
who looked very much
like Mary Pickford,
who was the biggest star
of the day.
So, the combination
made this young,
16-year-old girl... a star.
NARRATOR:
Gorman swept the competition,
and later that evening,
she was crowned
the very first Miss America.
"Margaret Gorman represents
the type of womanhood
America needs,"
the New York Times declared,
"Strong, red-blooded,
"able to shoulder
the responsibilities
"of homemaking and motherhood.
It is in her type that the hope
of the country rests."
NARRATOR:
The first Miss America Pageant
was a staggering success.
Before the receipts
were even tallied,
city officials announced plans
to continue the contest
through the decade
confident that as long as there
were girls in bathing suits
the crowds would come.
It was one of the f)rCt,
if not the first instances
of the marb)a'EB%Dween g
and the beauty
of the female form,
which was ingenious,
because from then on
many, many advertisers thought
they could get more attention
by putting a good-looking woman
into the picture.
Some say it got started in 1921
in Atlantic City.
FERENTZ:
The very first years,
there was a literal breakdown:
Five points for
the construction of the head,
five points for the limbs,
three points for the torso,
two points for the leg...
I mean, it... you know,
and it added up to 100%.
Whether they really went
by that, it's hard to say.
NARRATOR:
Throughout the 1920s,
scores of young women flocked
to Atlantic City each year,
most hoping the pageant
would land them a career
in show business.
While the average working woman
labored in a factory
or a typing pool,
Miss America had offers
from Hollywood and vaudeville
and the opportunity
to cash in on her looks.
ANNOUNCER:
Five feet, four inches tall,
118 pounds of beauty.
Norma Smallwood is crowned
Miss America of 1926.
NARRATOR:
During the year of her reign,
Miss America 1926,
a small-town girl
from Tulsa, Oklahoma,
reportedly made over $100,000,
more than either Babe Ruth
or the President
of the United States.
FERENTZ:
Norma Smallwood
had an acute business sense.
In 1927, when she was due to
return to crown her successor,
she demanded a fee for her
appearance in Atlantic City.
And although she arrived
and took part in the early part
of the pageant,
during the middle when that
money was not forthcoming,
Norma picked up and left for
another job in North Carolina.
And the press
was not very kind to that.
They thought that she should
have been the gracious one
that didn't take the money
and stayed around
to crown her successor.
And Norma thought,
"I'm sorry, this is a business."
BILLIE HOLIDAY:
♪ If I should take a notion ♪
♪ To jump into the ocean ♪
♪ Ain't nobody's business
if I do. ♪
PEISS:
There was a general sense
that the old world had died
and a new one was being born.
And I think that was especially
important for women.
There'd been a women's movement
that had been successful
in certain ways:
Women had gotten the right
to vote, for example,
and women are increasingly in
the labor force in the 1920s.
A number
are getting college educated.
And so in some ways the pageant
seems to be a contradiction.
Here, feminists had wanted women
to move into the public sphere
to sort of gain the positions
that men had gained,
and yet the pageant represents
women very much as female,
and as, in some ways,
sexualized as beauty objects.
NARRATOR:
The pageant's attention
to the female form
had troubled
conservative Americans
since the very beginning.
But in the late-1920s, critics
finally went on the offensive.
All over the country,
women's clubs
and religious organizations
publicly attacked
the Miss America Pageant,
and accused organizers of
corrupting the nation's morals.
MAN:
And her hips,
north, east, south, and west.
Why look at those eyes...
"Before the competition,
the contestants
were splendid examples
of innocence
and pure womanhood,"
one protester argued.
"Afterward, their heads were
filled with vicious ideas."
MAE WEST:
♪ Just look me over ♪
♪ Say, I'm plenty... ♪
NARRATOR:
In 1928,
fearing the controversy would
ruin Atlantic City's reputation,
the Chamber of Commerce
voted 27 to three
to cancel
the Miss America Pageant.
WEST:
♪ Oh... ♪
NARRATOR:
For now, morality
had shut the pageant down.
But America's infatuation
with beauty would endure.
WEST:
♪ They call me
Sister Honky-Tonk. ♪
MAN:
♪ Keep young and beautiful ♪
♪ It's your duty
to be beautiful ♪
♪ Keep young and beautiful,
if you want to be loved ♪
♪ Don't fail
to do your stuff... ♪
It's very... it's very me.
It's very... it's very Brandi.
WOMAN:
♪ Take care of all
those charms ♪
♪ And you'll always be
in someone's arms ♪
♪ Keep young and beautiful ♪
♪ If you want to be loved. ♪
WOMAN:
I think the fascination
with beauty pageants is
that there can be a winner;
that there are certain rules,
guidelines
that constitute beauty;
that it is not necessarily
in the eye of the beholder;
that we,
as the collective beholder,
have agreed on certain qualities
that create beauty
and, uh, that there can be
a contest to judge it.
It's this fascinating thing.
WOMAN:
♪ Keep young and beautiful ♪
♪ It's your duty
to be beautiful ♪
♪ That's right, girls... ♪
WOMAN:
What gets defined as beauty?
It's not unlike
high-fashion super models
in that the bodies that work are
the bodies that are least like
what women look like.
So what are we saying?
What are we actually saying
about what women look like
when we say, "Well, you know
what, to be most beautiful,
you have to not look like
what women look like"?
MAN:
I think that fashion and beauty
is everything
in the way a woman marks
her identity today,
unfortunately.
But I can't think of a period of
time when it wasn't about that,
and there are all sorts of
obvious manifestations of that:
you know, the length of your
skirt, the size of your waist.
But there are other
even more subtle things--
like when you shave your legs,
even if you're wearing pants
that day,
you feel three times prettier,
I think.
WOMAN:
♪ If you're wide,
exercise all the fat off ♪
♪ Take it off,
over here, over there ♪
WOMAN:
You know, there's a yearning
in the human spirit,
an aspiring for beauty.
And the successful man
still has
a beautiful woman on his arm--
that's the prize.
It's been our power structure,
and it's...
it's still operative.
Beauty is still the currency
out there.
WOMAN:
♪ Don't fail to do your stuff ♪
♪ With a little powder
and a puff ♪
♪ Keep young... ♪
The traditional way to get ahead
is to compete with other women
for the favors of men, you know,
and this is not different
from any other marginalized
or less powerful group.
You're supposed to compete
with each other
for the favors of the powerful.
So what could be
a greater example of that
than a beauty contest?
WOMAN:
♪ Boop-e-doo, ah! ♪
NARRATOR:
Not long after the Miss America
Pageant was canceled,
a devastating
economic depression
brought Atlantic City's
tourist trade to a halt.
Desperate, local businessmen
opted to ignore the critics
and revived their
lucrative beauty pageant.
In 1933, 30 young women were
brought to Atlantic City,
aboard a chartered train
called the Beauty Special,
to compete for
Miss America's crown.
MAN:
Yeah, it's sort of relaxing,
what with strikes
and food shortages
and international disputes
and so on
to have the lassies back with us
once again.
Oh, well, one good turn
deserves another.
NARRATOR:
So striking was the change
between the ideal figure
of the '20s and that of 1933,
one observer said
of the contestants,
that one might almost
have thought
that a new anatomical species
had come into being.
Among the entries was
Marian Bergeron,
a high-school sophomore
and the daughter
of a Connecticut policeman.
BERGERON:
1933: it was the depression,
and at 15 years old,
I hadn't been out
of West Haven, Connecticut,
let alone wind up
in Atlantic City.
NARRATOR:
A curvaceous blonde
with a striking resemblance
to screen siren Jean Harlow,
Bergeron had competed
in her first local pageant
just weeks before.
To her surprise, she had won
the title of Miss New Haven,
and then Miss Connecticut,
and before she knew it, she was
being crowned Miss America.
BERGERON SETZER:
To the judges' eyes,
I was the typical American girl:
totally unsophisticated, very
naive, had a lot of enthusiasm,
had a lot of talent
that they didn't even ask for,
but I did have that.
And I was just... I was just
a 1933 typical American girl.
My figure then,
as they described it,
was a typical Mae West figure,
which was hourglass:
34 bust, 26 waist, 82 buns.
NARRATOR:
The new Miss America
was just the kind of girl
vaudeville producers
were looking for
and they soon came
waving contracts,
promising to make her a star.
But all the attention
was short-lived.
As soon as the newspapers
reported that she was only 15,
the show-business contracts
were quickly withdrawn
and Bergeron went back
to high school.
BERGERON SETZER:
On our way home, I had to go
back only to be met by the nuns
that said I had had entirely
too much undue publicity.
And they felt
that it would be better
if I chose another school.
Yeah, and that's practically
being kicked out of school.
Here I feel like
I'm really somebody.
You know, I'm just
the most glamorous thing
that ever happened
at 15 years old,
but the... but the nuns
didn't think so.
PEISS:
Beauty pageants,
by the early '30s,
had a reputation for being
somewhat disreputable,
like a carnival atmosphere.
Especially the association
with Atlantic City
and the seaside resorts
made that venue
somewhat of a question mark,
I think, for women
in terms of
their respectability.
To be a public woman had
a long-standing connotation
of having loose morals,
of being either a prostitute
or sexually loose.
And that doesn't disappear,
certainly through the 1930s.
NARRATOR:
In October 1935, a pageant
scandal rocked Atlantic City.
Less than a month after
17-year-old Henrietta Leaver
was crowned Miss America, a nude
statue of her was unveiled
in her home town of Pittsburgh.
Leaver, a high-school dropout
and dime-store salesgirl
swore she had worn
a bathing suit when she posed,
and that her grandmother
had been present at all times.
But the press coverage
was merciless,
and the businessmen
behind the pageant
finally decided to make
some changes.
For help, they turned
to a single 29-year-old
Southern Baptist
with years of experience
in public relations.
As the pageant's
Executive Secretary,
she would spend
the next three decades
inventing a new image
for Miss America.
Her name was Lenora Slaughter.
FERENTZ:
She was the iron fist
in a velvet glove.
I think that she was a woman
that was well ahead of her time.
She was tough
when she had to be,
but knew how to get by
on a Southern drawl.
NARRATOR:
Slaughter's mission now was
to eliminate scandal
and to attract what she called
"a better class of contestants."
She immediately established
a minimum age requirement of 18,
then added a talent competition
to the traditional lineup of
bathing suits and evening gowns.
Once the contestants
were in Atlantic City,
Slaughter insisted they be
chaperoned at all times,
and that they observe
a strict curfew of 1:00 a.m.
They were barred
from drinking establishments,
forbidden to smoke,
and there were to be no
private visits with men--
not even their fathers.
LOUIS ARMSTRONG:
♪ I don't stay out late ♪
♪ Don't care to go ♪
♪ I'm home about 8:00,
me and my radio ♪
♪ I take a... ♪
A pageant judge
once asked Slaughter
what to look for in a winner.
"Honey," she answered,
"just pick me a lady."
LEVI:
She brought a respectability
to the pageant.
She presented her girls
with class, with style.
She transformed the pageant
by setting the standards high,
by making it something
that women would want
to participate in.
NARRATOR:
Sometime later,
Slaughter slipped
one final entry requirement
into the pageant by-laws.
Known as Rule Seven,
the new regulation strictly
limited pageant participation
to women "in good health
and of the white race."
WOMAN:
Race has always factored
into anyone's notion
of ideal womanhood
in the United States.
It's just that the way
in which whiteness functions
is through invisibility.
It's not seen as a race.
It's just the normal way to be;
it's just regular.
And it's really no different
in the Miss America Pageant.
ROSE:
That's what's most interesting
about it to me--
that we are supposed to believe
that this is what American
womanhood looks like.
And it really is an enormously
narrow conception
from facial features,
you know, height, weight.
And then of course,
there are the most obvious,
more political categories:
race, ethnicity,
and all of these things
are very important
in the historical understanding
of the pageant.
NARRATOR:
By the early 1940s, Slaughter
had constructed an ideal woman
to represent
the Miss America Pageant.
Now, the mass media would make
her a star.
Each September, millions
of Americans watched
the annual newsreel
of Miss America's crowning.
She was featured in newspapers
and advertisements,
and honored with her own day
at the World's Fair.
And when the United States
entered World War II,
and the Federal Government shut
down most large public events,
Slaughter convinced officials
that the pageant should be
allowed to go on.
"Miss America is emblematic
of the nation's spirit,"
she told them,
"and that spirit continues
through war and peace,
good times and bad."
Permission was granted
on the condition
that the winner sell war bonds.
PEISS:
The early period of the 1940s
is one where we see women being
mobilized for the war effort.
They're being encouraged
to take jobs,
to work more than full time
to support the war effort.
At the same time,
those women are encouraged
to maintain their femininity
and their beauty.
And there's a huge effort
to sell women lipstick,
to see cosmetics
as morale boosters.
And they are one product that
is not rationed during the war.
There's an attempt
to ration cosmetics
but it's overturned
within six months.
Women are given the pitch
that one of the reasons
we're fighting the war
is for women to be beautiful.
NARRATOR:
Lenora Slaughter believed
and she wanted Miss America
tto prove it.3
So in 1944, she convinced the
pageant's new board of directors
to award Miss America
a scholarship to college.
Raising money proved
a bigger challenge.
Of the 236 companies Slaughter
approached for contributions,
only five signed on as sponsors.
But between them, Slaughter had
enough cash for a $5,000 prize,
and in 1945,
the Miss America Pageant became
one of the first organizations
in the country to offer
college scholarships to women.
LEVI:
That's immediately what
redefined Miss America
because no othdB@Aant,
competition, beauty contest
was giving scholarship money.
And by doing this,
it really, really set the
pageant in a different category.
You didn't have to go in there
just to prove you had
a pretty figure;
you could go in there to prove
you had brains.
NARRATOR:
Among those vying for the first
scholarship in 1945
was a 21-year-old New Yorker
named Bess Myerson.
The American-born daughter
of Russian-Jewish immigrants,
Myerson had paid her own way
through New York's Hunter
College by giving piano lessons
in the Bronx neighborhood
where she grew up.
Now she hoped to go on
to graduate school,
where she planned
to study conducting.
MYERSON:
Talent was very important
because that was the way we were
going to make our living.
That's what we were going
to support ourselves doing
when we grew up.
The most important thing was
that you do well at school...
Oh, no.
The most important thing was
that you listened
to your parents,
that you do well in school
and that you play
a musical instrument.
We never imagined anything else
would be open to us.
NARRATOR:
To Lenora Slaughter, Myerson
seemed the ideal candidate
for the new scholarship prize.
She was beautiful,
talented, smart.
There was only one problem: she
would have to change her name.
MYERSON:
Lenora Slaughter said my name
was not a good name
for show business.
And I said, "Well, you know
I have no intention
of going into show business."
I said, "What do you want me
to change it to?"
"Well, you know there are a lot
of good stage names,
like Beth...
Beth Merrick."
I said, "The problem is
that I'm Jewish, yes?
"And with that kind of name
"it'll be quite obvious to
everyone else that I'm Jewish.
"And you don't want
to have to deal
with a Jewish Miss America."
And that really was
the bottom line.
I said,
"I can't change my name."
"You have to understand.
"I cannot change my name.
"I live in a building
with 250 Jewish families,
"the Sholom Aleichem
apartment houses.
"If I should win,
I want everybody to know
that I'm the daughter
of Louie and Bella Myerson."
NARRATOR:
On September 3, Myerson and
the other contestants appeared
on Atlantic City's Boardwalk
for the Miss America Pageant's
opening ceremony:
a victory parade to celebrate
the end of the war.
In the crowd was Myerson's
older sister Sylvia.
Her mother,
who spoke no English,
had been left at home
in the Bronx.
MYERSON:
The first night, I compete
with a group of girls on talent.
I won.
Headline says,
"Jewish Girl in Atlantic City
Wins Talent
in Miss America Pageant."
Now, we've just learned
all the details
of six million Jews
being killed,
slaughtered, burned, tortured.
And naturally,
it attracts attention,
and the juxtaposition of the
two things was so improbable.
There were people
that would come to the hotel
where I was staying
with my sister.
They would introduce themselves
to me and say,
"I'm Jewish,
and it's just wonderful
that you're in this contest."
But how about
when people came up to you
with numbers on their arms,
which they did, as well,
and said, "You see this?
You have to win.
"You have to show the world
that we are not ugly.
That we shouldn't
be disposed of."
And so on,
however they worded it.
I have to tell you that I felt
this tremendous responsibility.
I owed it to those women
to give them a present, a gift.
That, to them, was the gift.
NARRATOR:
On the second night
of preliminaries,
Myerson scored another win,
in the swimsuit competition,
and she now seemed a strong
favorite for the finals.
"The new Miss America
will either be
Miss New York City,
Bess Myerson,"
one newspaper predicted,
"or somebody else."
MALE ANNOUNCER:
They're about to pick
Miss America of 1945.
FEMALE ANNOUNCER:
Well, they've made their choice,
and the crown goes
to Miss New York City,
a 21-year-old, 5'10" brunette,
Bess Myerson,
Hunter College graduate.
NARRATOR:
By the time
Myerson's name was announced,
her sister, Sylvia,
was already in tears.
From the audience came shouts
of "Mazel tov!"
"Don't let anybody kid you,"
Myerson said years later.
"It was one hell
of a terrific moment."
LEVI:
Bess was the answer
to every Jewish woman's dream.
Her win was such
a multilevel symbol.
It was a symbol of a certain
statement against anti-Semitism.
It was a symbol of a victory
against Hitler.
It was a symbol for women,
and when she won, there was
great celebration in our house.
It was like when Roosevelt won
or something.
NARRATOR:
Myerson expected to spend
her reign making appearances
and promoting
the pageant's new sponsors.
But after an obligatory
four-week performance tour,
where drunks in the audience
demanded
she play the piano
in her bathing suit,
there were few requests
for her time.
None of the sponsors wanted
a Jewish girl--
even a Jewish Miss America--
posing with their products.
MYERSON:
Halfway through that year,
I said to the pageant,
"I'm not available to you
anymore,
"because I want to do
something else.
"I've met people
from an organization
"called the Anti-Defamation
League.
"And they've asked me to go out
on a tour,
"speaking at the high schools
and colleges,
"speaking to students
where there are problems
"having to do
with anti-Semitism,
with hatred, with racism."
And I did a speech called "You
Can't Hate and Be Beautiful."
BANET-WEISER:
Bess Myerson took on the mantle
of Miss America
in a different way.
It's the historical moment,
it's her ethnic identity,
it's her own aspirations.
All those put together,
you know,
provided a very different kind
of Miss America
and a very different kind
of reign.
NARRATOR:
Myerson had made Miss America
a scholar and a lady.
But the following year,
pageant judges made it clear
that looks still counted.
"It was the year
they brought out
the rubberized bathing suit,"
one of them said later,
"and we voted for the girl with
the best of everything showing."
♪ Five months, two weeks,
two days ♪
♪ My lovely baby's been gone. ♪
♪ Five months, two weeks,
two days ♪
♪ My lovely baby's been gone. ♪
♪ If you see my baby ♪
♪ Please send her home to me. ♪
♪ Worried, oh, oh, baby. ♪
STEINEM:
The swimsuit competition
is probably
the most honest part
of the competition,
because it really is
about bodies.
It is about looking at women
as objects.
That's what it's about.
The fact is
that the most disqualifying part
of the competition
is how you look.
♪ Ooh, ah. ♪
♪ Ooh, ah, ooh, ah. ♪
CHO:
When you see their bodies,
it's so interesting
because they seem so not real.
You don't see anything off.
They are so perfect
and not sexual, really,
but you... just kind of
these perfectly shaped women,
that their bodies
are very smooth.
There's no creases or lines.
There's no stretch marks
or nipples or hair.
It's kind of jarring.
You think,
"God, whose body is like that?"
And then you think,
"Maybe I'm not the woman.
Maybe they're the women,
and I'm not the woman."
By then, you kind of feel
like an impostor, too.
MIZRAHI:
It's always
so sort of heartbreaking
to watch
the swimsuit competition,
because these good girls,
they're sort of, like,
"Ooh, I'm such a piece of meat,"
Or something, you know.
Of all the parts of the pageant
that, I feel,
victimize women the most,
it's that part of the pageant.
These poor girls, in those
painful-looking high heels,
my heart goes out to them.
But honestly,
if you have to wear a swimsuit
and you have to parade,
you should wear the high heels,
because there's nothing better
on your leg.
WOMAN:
I worked so hard to be ready
to compete in the swimsuit
that I didn't dread it.
You know, I actually found it
kind of empowering.
I figured that once I got over
enough issues
to walk around on the stage
in a bathing suit
in front of 20 million people,
I could pretty much do anything
I wanted to.
ANNOUNCER:
Go ahead and drool,
it's Miss America time.
NARRATOR:
For more than a quarter century,
the bathing suit competition
had been the Miss America
Pageant's feature attraction.
But with the scholarship program
now in place,
Lenora Slaughter wanted to
project a more dignified image.
The challenge was to downplay
the bathing suits
without offending
Catalina Swimwear,
one of the pageant's
major sponsors.
In 1947, Slaughter struck
the term "bathing suit"
from the official
pageant vocabulary,
and replaced it with the more
athletic-sounding "swimsuit."
Then she banned two-piece suits
from the competition,
and announced that Miss America
would now be crowned
in an evening gown.
Still, when most Americans
thought of the pageant,
a girl in a bathing suit
was the first thing
that came to mind.
Then along came Yolande Betbeze.
A 21-year-old opera singer
from Mobile, Alabama,
Betbeze had been recently sprung
from convent school
when she captured her first
local crown, Miss Torch 1949.
Miss Alabama wasn't far behind.
WOMAN:
I didn't plan
on the Miss America Pageant.
I didn't know anything about it.
I was in a convent for 14 years.
The last four years
in a cloistered convent,
behind high walls,
and no escape.
And I was very naive
when I arrived in Atlantic City.
I mean, coming from a small town
in Alabama,
borrowing shoes of high heels,
and taking the braces
off my teeth,
I had a ball.
NARRATOR:
The minute Betbeze stepped
off the train in Atlantic City,
Slaughter knew she was looking
at the next Miss America.
♪ Now give us fever. ♪
NARRATOR:
"Yolande was the sexiest,
most glamorous thing
I had ever laid eyes on,"
she later said.
Slaughter's new husband,
a business manager
for the pageant, agreed.
"She can't lose," he predicted,
"unless the women judges
run away from her."
FOX:
I thought I was a little
too plain to be Miss America,
but I knew that I would do well
in talent
as an operatic coloratura,
and indeed I did.
I did win the talent.
The swimsuit was difficult.
Fortunately,
it was a suit in good taste,
one piece, white,
nothing very revealing.
But even so, I mean, to stand up
for the first time in your life
in front of 50,000 people
in a bathing suit
is, is awkward.
ANNOUNCER:
The field is squared off
at 16 curvaceous finalists.
The winner is brown-haired,
brown-eyed Yolande Betbeze, 21,
of Mobile, Alabama.
NARRATOR:
The morning
after she was crowned,
the new Miss America was
summoned to a breakfast meeting,
where she was to be briefed
on her duties
for the coming year.
FOX:
I did not know
what to expect with this.
So I arrived and they...
All these, these suits
were sitting about.
Older men, board of directors,
congratulated me,
and said, "Now, Miss Betbeze,
this is what I represent.
This is what you're going to do
for us."
Then it came
to the bathing suit,
the most important sponsor.
And this man said to me, "In
November, we'll be in Wyoming,
and you'll wear
this and that bathing suit."
I said, "Wait a minute, please.
"No-- no way.
"Go into Milwaukee
in the middle of the winter
"and walk around a department
store in a bathing suit
"is not my idea of Miss America.
Scholarship foundation,
the reason I'm here."
And he really, really thought
I had lost my mind.
He couldn't believe it.
FERENTZ:
I love the fact
that she made the statement
that she had to play their game
to become Miss America,
and once she became
Miss America,
they had to play by her game.
I thought it was
very bold of her
to say to one of its major
sponsors, which was Catalina,
that she just wasn't going
to pose in a swimsuit.
That she was an opera singer,
she was not a pinup.
NARRATOR:
Catalina withdrew its
sponsorship of Miss America,
and soon launched not one,
but two pageants of its own--
Miss U.S.A. and Miss Universe.
Both judged contestants entirely
on looks
and absolutely required them
to wear Catalina swimsuits.
LEVI:
For the pageant,
there was always this pull
between the pulchritude
and the pulpit.
There was always
this sort of dichotomy about,
"How are you an upstanding,
religious, well-educated girl,
and you can show
your thighs and cleavage?"
Which is always kind of
a theme of America anyhow,
sexuality and godliness.
The Elvis Presley phenomenon:
shake your hips while singing
"Nearer My God to Thee."
NARRATOR:
In the fall of 1952,
the pageant's directors invited
an up-and-coming
Hollywood actress
named Marilyn Monroe
to serve as the grand marshal
of the Boardwalk Parade.
"She wore the first dress
anybody had ever worn,"
that year's Miss America said
later,
"that was cut down
to her navel."
Monroe was not asked back
to Atlantic City.
It had taken
nearly three decades
to transform Miss America
from a local celebrity
to a national phenomenon.
But making her a household name
would take just one night,
September 11th, 1954,
when Miss America
would be crowned live
on national television.
The pageant's board of directors
had asked
former Miss America Bess Myerson
to provide backstage commentary
for the viewers at home,
and had even invited
Academy Award-winning actress
Grace Kelly
to judge the competition.
ANNOUNCER:
...plenty of excitement
out front, too, Bess.
Just a while ago, the judges
announced the ten semifinal...
NARRATOR:
Now, as the cameras wheeled
into position
on Atlantic City's
Convention Hall stage,
ABC sent out
the broadcast signal,
and television audiences
coast to coast
joined the Miss America finals
already in progress.
WOMAN:
The only time
I really noticed a camera was,
we were waiting
to have the crowning.
I saw a television camera,
and it was coming toward us,
so I thought,
"Oh, it's, it's time."
And then I saw Lenora Slaughter,
the head of the pageant,
bringing a banner over,
and she put it on my lap.
She said,
"Lee, you're our Miss America."
ANNOUNCER:
19-year-old Lee Ann Meriwether
of San Francisco, California.
My head flipped back,
and that is all I remember.
And I was crying hysterically.
Crying, crying, I couldn't stop.
But I do remember my mother
being pulled backstage.
And my mother said,
( whispering ):
"Stop your sniveling."
( snaps fingers ):
And that did it.
NARRATOR:
More than 27 million people,
nearly half
of the television audience,
watched the Miss America Pageant
that night,
in a broadcast that broke
all records for TV viewership.
"To think that folks
out in Idaho could see this
was just amazing,"
one pageant volunteer recalled.
"It just knocked everything
off the airwaves."
MAN:
The Miss America contest
was something
that seemed very glamorous
to all of us
in the '30s and '40s and '50s.
But all we ever saw of it
were snippets on newsreels
in movie theaters.
And then suddenly,
when television happened,
here was this fabulous event,
and in that period,
it was incredibly popular.
When you look at old
black-and-white television now
it looks so prehistoric,
but, my God, it was free,
it was in your house,
you could watch it.
And it changed everything.
ANNOUNCER:
The Miss America Pageant,
brought to you
by Philco Corporation.
NARRATOR:
By the second broadcast,
the pageant had been
redesigned for TV,
and a celebrity singer
and announcer had been hired
to serve as the regular
master of ceremonies.
The 40-year-old star
of a popular TV program called
Stop the Music,
he was known to audiences
across the country
as the guy with the smile
you can read by.
His name was Bert Parks.
MAN:
Bert Parks.
( applause )
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Good evening.
You're a wonderful audience.
HORN:
Bert Parks came along
at just the right time.
And his ability to be funny, to
be extemporaneous, to be silly,
and yet at the same time,
allow the women to be
the stars of the show
was a perfect series
of ingredients
that the Miss America program
needed at that time.
( orchestra playing
"Ain't She Sweet" )
That's fine. Thank you.
( applause )
And this, of course,
ladies and gentlemen,
is Miss Oklahoma.
From what city,
please?
I'm from Alva,
Oklahoma.
Alva?
Alva.
What is the
population of Alva?
7,000.
What is Alva
most famous for,
Miss Oklahoma?
Wheat and cattle
and my daddy's
bakery.
( laughter )
Golden Krust Bakery;
call him up tonight.
( laughter )
LEVI:
I don't know
if he would fly today,
but he was really into
the girls, the women,
and that's what made Bert Parks
so different.
He wasn't a celebrity flown in
on a Saturday night.
He was there all week
getting to know them.
They trusted him.
He loved what he was doing,
and he really was one
of the defining factors
that made households
and television households
love Miss America.
And when he sang "There She Is,"
that was it.
There she was.
And now, Miss America
of 1958,
there is the runway.
There are
your subjects.
( orchestra plays intro
to "There She Is" )
PARKS:
♪ Oh, there she is ♪
♪ Miss America. ♪
NARRATOR:
Making its debut
right alongside Parks
was the official
Miss America theme song.
Composed in just under an hour
by a New York songwriter
named Bernie Wayne,
the song was an instant hit.
It would soon be as recognizable
as the national anthem.
PARKS:
♪ For she may turn out to be ♪
♪ The queen of femininity. ♪
PEISS:
It evokes a wedding
with Bert Parks kind of giving
away the... the bride,
or, in his youth,
he was more of the groom.
It evokes the debutante ball.
PARKS:
♪ ...Who are more than pretty ♪
♪ Can come true
in Atlantic City. ♪
PEISS:
There is this real sense
of suddenly being the most
beautiful woman at the ball.
And so there is this sense that
this could happen to anyone,
or at least that's the fantasy--
that this could happen
to any girl.
PARKS:
♪ ...Sweetheart. ♪
There she is, ladies and
gentlemen, Miss America.
( applause )
ALVAREZ:
We didn't see a whole lot
of what it was like
to be an American woman.
This was our little window
into what it was like,
what this world was like.
It was a way to, I don't know,
climb the ladder of success.
And so, you know, it was like
watching a female version
of a Horatio Alger story.
I had no knowledge
of the pageant really at all.
I knew that there was
a Miss America Pageant,
but I thought it was
a "bathing beauty contest,"
and as such,
I would never have entered.
And then my father passed away,
and just, my life
sort of stopped right there.
And my mother said, "The money
is no longer here, daddy's gone,
"and if you want to continue on
with school, that's the thing.
Go to Atlantic City."
STEINEM:
Beauty contests are ways that,
if you live in
a poor neighborhood,
you can imagine getting ahead
because it is a way up.
It is a way to scholarships,
to attention,
and it's one of the few things
that you see out there
as a popular symbol.
When I was living
in a kind of factory working
neighborhood of Toledo,
the K-Part Television Miss TV
Contest, something like that,
was advertised.
So I decided I would try
to enter the contest
even though I was underage.
I think I was 16 and the limit
was... was 18.
So I lied about my age.
It wasn't a terrible experience.
It was a surrealistic
experience.
You had to put on
your bathing suit and walk
and stand on a beer keg.
I did, you know, three or four
different kinds of dances.
Spanish and Russian
and heaven knows what.
I thought I'd get money
for college,
and it seemed glamorous.
It seemed to me, in high school,
like a way out
of a not-too-great life
in a pretty poor neighborhood.
NARRATOR:
By 1958, Atlantic City's
local tourist attraction
had become one of the most
popular television events
in the country.
With networks competing
over the broadcasting contract
and companies clamoring
to provide the high-profile
program with sponsorship,
the Miss America Pageant
could now afford
to award over $200,000 worth
of scholarships.
But winning money for college
was only part
of the pageant's appeal.
As every contestant knew,
being crowned Miss America
on national television
could turn a small-town girl
into an instant celebrity.
( applause )
I'm sure you all realize,
ladies and gentlemen,
what a frightening experience
it is for these young ladies,
most of whom have never appeared
in public before,
much less here in the convention
hall in Atlantic City
before some 25,000 people and
over a full television network.
NARRATOR:
One of the contestants
that year was Mary Ann Mobley,
a 19-year-old drama major with
her eye on the Broadway stage.
A native of Brandon,
Mississippi-- population 2,500--
Mobley had competed in her first
pageant only two weeks before,
at the personal request
of Brandon's mayor,
and had walked off
with the state title.
PARKS:
Miss Mississippi.
( applause )
WOMAN:
Everyone was in shock.
I said to my Sunday school
teacher,
I said, "I can't believe I'm
on the way to Atlantic City."
I mean, I had seen
the previous Miss America.
She was tall.
I mean, her legs started
at my armpits.
And she had these wonderful
features and long blonde hair,
and I thought that's what
Miss America should look like
and I'm nowhere near that.
And now, ladies and gentlemen,
we come to the talent
competition.
MOBLEY:
Now I have to tell you
that I had never sung
with an orchestra.
And there I was in front of two
football fields put together.
Well, I was panicked.
And my horror was,
I was going to get out there
and no sound
was going to come out.
And one of the stagehands
tapped me on the shoulder
and he said,
"You go get 'em, Mississippi."
Let's bring her on.
( applause )
MOBLEY:
And they swagged the curtain,
and I thought,
I've got two options:
I can run,
or I can walk out there.
And I said I can't embarrass
my home state and myself
by running away.
I have to walk out there.
Tonight as my talent,
L!ACG a portion
of the lovely "Un Bel Di"
from Puccini's opera,
Madam Butterfly?
♪ Un bel di vedremo... ♪
MOBLEY:
And I started "Un bel di," and
it came out and it sounded okay.
♪ ...Mo confin del mare... ♪
And then I said "Stop.
"But I'm tired of being
proper and cultured
and of appreciating
Beethoven, Puccini and Bach."
I want to sing and dance to
something that's solid and hot.
So there are gonna be
some changes made.
MOBLEY:
I said,
♪ There'll be a change
in the weather ♪
♪ And a change in the sea ♪
♪ And from now on,
there'll be a change in me. ♪
( applause )
MOBLEY:
They started to applaud.
♪ ...My dress and my name ♪
♪ Nothing about me's
gonna be the same. ♪
MOBLEY:
I said, they like me,
or else they're just applauding
that I'm not going
to finish the aria.
♪ ...Change in me! ♪
( applause )
PARKS:
Mary Ann Mobley!
FERENTZ:
I think Mary Ann
was very popular
because she was different.
She was tiny and spunky
and had a little bit of guts.
PARKS:
Here is your question,
Miss Mississippi.
What is your
favorite topic,
when with
a young man,
for opening
the conversation?
Well, I've read
different articles
that tell you how to get
along with the opposite sex,
and the first
thing that they say is,
get him to talk about himself.
So the first thing I ask is,
"Do you play football?"
or "What sport are you
interested in?"
And then if he doesn't
say anything,
then you say, "Well,
what are your hobbies?"
And then you go down the line
from there
and if you can't get him
to answer you on any of those,
then you're just quiet
for the rest of the evening.
( laughter )
( applause )
FERENTZ:
I think that she showed a
different side to Miss America,
a more girl-next-door type.
I think that more young women
could relate to Mary Ann
than they perhaps could
to the Miss Americas
that had preceded her.
PARKS:
First runner up, Joan Lucille
McDonald, Miss Iowa.
Miss America: Miss Mississippi!
( orchestra plays fanfare )
PARKS:
♪ Oh, there she is,
Miss America ♪
♪ There she is... ♪
MOBLEY:
Once I won, I came unglued.
I mean, I'm not talking
about glistening tears.
They were running down my chin
onto my chest and my dress.
CBS ran that for a long time
because you really saw someone
terribly, terribly affected
by what was happening
in her life.
But I remember thinking, what
am I... what am I doing here?
No one's going to believe this.
And I'm not pretty enough
to be Miss America,
but here I am
with a crown on my head.
It's... it's real,
and how could it happen
to the little girl
from Brandon, Mississippi?
I think even now
it evokes memories.
I guess what I was really
feeling was, I was Cinderella.
( oldies dance music playing )
ALL:
♪ Everybody's got talent. ♪
♪ Everybody's got
some kind of talent. ♪
♪ Everybody's got talent
hidden somewhere ♪
♪ Hidden somewhere,
hidden somewhere. ♪
To be pretty and to be talented,
too, now there is a combination.
WOMAN:
Over the years,
the talent competition has
become the most significant
and the most popular part
of this decisive final night.
The ability to be poised and
personable in the living room
is a far cry from the ability to
be self-possessed on the stage
of this great convention hall
before a live audience
of 25,000 people
and a television audience
of many millions.
Now there's a me... that's
really mostly... Cleopatra!
LEVI:
I do remember a girl
having a talent
where she told us
how she packed her suitcase.
I definitely remember that.
And illustrators were big.
They had big pieces of paper
clipped on
and they would quickly do
cartoon sketches and things,
I remember that.
WOMAN:
I'm going to do a striptease...
in reverse.
GOLDMAN:
I have this great memory
of this beautiful blonde girl
from Wisconsin
whose talent was telling a
fishing story with an accent.
I'm still around,
I have my pipe...
got a pole
and line for cast!
GOLDMAN:
And she was just beautiful.
And you were laughing
at the screen even then--
you couldn't believe that
that was her talent,
telling a story
with a Norwegian accent.
I'm competing
for Miss America.
What are you going to do
for talent?
( audience laughing )
Oh, no, no, of course
I believe you...
I'm not mad...
MIZRAHI:
I don't really remember
any of the talent
except that it was
always terrible, you know,
and completely not interesting.
And that, you know, what I used
to think was a giant flop
would get the biggest applause.
Like, I'd sit there thinking,
"Wow, that stank."
And then the audience
would just go mad,
loving every second of it.
( applause, cheering )
HORN:
A lot of people sat back
and laughed at it.
I thought that was cruel
because here was a young woman
that was competing
her little heart out
for a coveted prize
that was important to her.
That's what the program
was all about.
It was another reason why it
became so popular
because it was every woman
and every woman was competing.
And every woman is not
an accomplished singer
or an accomplished monologist.
CHO:
If I had a talent,
I don't know what I would do.
I think that I would probably...
collate a script.
Collate some new pages
in a script.
That's... I'm really
good at that.
That's probably my talent.
Or operating a three-hole punch.
I can do that pretty swiftly and
I'm probably the best at that.
What would I do as my talent?
I would probably sing a song.
I wouldn't enter, but...
Now I would, I suppose,
read something I'd written.
As my talent?
You know, I worried about that.
I mean, there was a way in which
I thought I could never be that,
but it wasn't just
because of the beauty.
I just didn't have
any displayable talents.
I couldn't sing.
I couldn't dance.
I had an accent, so I couldn't
do a dramatic part.
And I sort of wondered
what I would do.
( fanfare playing )
( applause )
BERT PARKS:
Susan Brock, Miss California.
♪ Walking down that runway,
that fabulous runway. ♪
♪ Her heart is pounding so
on the runway. ♪
NARRATOR:
By 1960,
the Miss America Pageant
had become a national ritual.
Each year, on the second
Saturday in September,
Americans gathered
in their living rooms,
switched on their sets,
and settled in to see
if their favorite contestant
would capture the crown.
Five times over the next decade,
the Miss America Pageant was the
highest-rated show of the year.
PAGEANT ANNOUNCER:
Because with her beauty,
poise, charm and talent,
the American girl has become
the most envied girl
in the world.
NARRATOR:
Richard Nixon claimed
it was the only program
his daughters were allowed
to stay up late to watch.
And all across the country now,
little girls dreamed
of becoming Miss America.
LEVI:
There was this time--
what I sort of call the
"debutante era" of the pageant--
sort of the late '50s,
early '60s,
when everyone looked like
they were at a cotillion
with the high white gloves
and the crinolines
and the big hoop skirts
and they were for God,
motherhood and apple pie.
They wanted to be good mothers,
good wives.
They wanted to be supporters of
what their husbands chose to do.
They wanted world peace.
This is a
presidential election year.
If a qualified woman
were running for president,
how would you feel about
voting for her and why?
If the men candidates running
were qualified,
I feel I would vote against her.
My reasons being that women
are very high-strung
and emotional people.
They aren't reliable enough when
it comes to making a decision,
a snap decision.
I believe that a man
in such a predicament
would be able to make a more
justifiable and better decision.
What, in your opinion,
constitutes the ideal wife?
I imagine that the ideal wife
depends entirely on
the viewpoint of the husband.
( applause )
Some sociologists say
that American women
are usurping the place of
the male in American life
and have become
too dominant.
Do you agree
or disagree, and why?
I do agree with that.
I believe that there are far too
many women in the working world.
I can see many cases where this
is a necessary arrangement,
but I do feel that a woman's
place is in the home
with her husband
and with her children.
HORN:
The concept of Miss America
as an ideal American woman
was consistent
with society's ideas
of what an ideal
young woman was.
She was your everyday young girl
who any man would be happy
to call daughter,
any man would be happy
to call wife.
Miss America was
the American girl-next-door.
She was an ideal
that many women aspired to.
NARRATOR:
Until now, the pageant had
managed to present
a vision of ideal womanhood
that most of the country shared.
But by the mid-1960s,
the all-American girl-next-door
was changing fast.
( Peggy Lee's "I'm a Woman"
begins playing )
LEE:
♪ I can wash out
44 pairs of socks ♪
♪ And have them hanging out
on the line. ♪
♪ I can starch and iron
two-dozen shirts ♪
♪ Before you can count
from one to nine. ♪
♪ I can scoop up a great big
dipper full of lard ♪
♪ From the drippings can... ♪
♪ Throw it in the skillet,
go out and do my shopping, ♪
♪ Be back before it melts
in the pan ♪
♪ 'Cause I'm a woman,
W-O-M-A-N ♪
♪ I'll say it again. ♪
NARRATOR:
At a time when bikinis and
miniskirts were all the rage,
pageant contestants
continued to wear
the regulation one-piece suits
and dresses
that fell within two inches
of their knees.
While antiwar protesters marched
through the nation's streets,
Miss America was in Vietnam,
touring with the USO.
And in a moment of
sexual revolution,
the pageant's ideal remained
wholesome and pure.
♪ 'Cause I'm a woman,
W-O-M-A-N... ♪
PEISS:
The pageant bore
no relationship
to the reality of life in the
United States at that moment:
the height of the Vietnam War,
a period of great civil unrest,
the civil rights movement
and black power movements
at their height,
and the beginnings
of a feminist movement,
the birth control pill,
the counterculture,
the origins of the gay and
lesbian liberation movement.
All of these suggested that the
pageant was terribly out of date
and that it really was no longer
relevant to the lives of women.
It was a very exhilarating,
affirming, funny explosion
of rebellion and consciousness.
It was partly
about taking off the symbols--
the gloves,
the little white gloves
the dyed-to-match shoes--
and in the middle
of all of that,
the artificiality of
the Miss America Contest
was an obvious kind of cartoon.
NARRATOR:
In the spring of 1968,
a 27-year-old writer and editor
named Robin Morgan
decided to take a stand
and, with help from a group
called "New York Radical Women,"
she began laying plans
for a protest
at the annual
Miss America Pageant.
Where else could one find
such a perfect combination
of American values?
Morgan argued.
Racism, militarism,
and capitalism
all packaged in one
ideal symbol: a woman.
WOMAN:
It seemed to me...
a sort of epiphany moment
because it was the nexus
of so many issues--
beauty standards, money,
women's freedom,
objectification of women,
patriotism--
and all of this somehow wrapped
up in motherhood and apple pie
or virginhood and apple pie,
in terms of Miss America.
So it seemed like,
"My God, you know,
what is not to dislike
about this?"
NARRATOR:
Word of the protest soon reached
Atlantic City,
and pageant organizers braced
themselves for the picket line.
It would be the first
major demonstration
of the women's liberation
movement in the United States.
MORGAN:
We had, you know, prepared
for about maybe 50 people,
and to do some
guerrilla theater,
some songs, some chants,
to picket on the boardwalk
all day.
What we had not counted on was
that close to 400 women
showed up.
And they came from all over.
I mean they were carrying signs
from Florida and from Wisconsin
and some people drove
from California,
and that was just amazing.
I mean, it had clearly--
this protest--
tapped into something
that was enormous and...
and very, very moving.
WOMAN:
♪ Ain't she quaint ♪
♪ With her face
all full of paint. ♪
STEINEM:
They put on the boardwalk
a big trash can
and dumped in it
all kinds of symbols
of the stereotypical
female role:
a steno pad, a dust mop,
an apron, a bra,
all of these things.
I think they never did
burn those items
because they couldn't get
a fire permit--
just shows you we've been
too law-abiding.
NARRATOR:
The demonstration
soon drew a crowd
of more than 600 spectators--
most of them men,
and nearly all unsympathetic.
One suggested
that the protesters
throw themselves
into the Freedom Trash Can.
The threats, the epithets, the
screams, were mostly from guys
who would, you know, lean over,
the barricades and do the usual.
I mean to say, sort of, you
know, "Go back to Russia."
"You're commie-pinko-lesbian-
crazy-broom-riding-witches."
You know, you name it.
"You're all too ugly to be
in the Miss America Pageant."
WOMAN:
♪ Ain't she fine. ♪
NARRATOR:
Inside Convention Hall,
the Miss America contestants
were running through
one last rehearsal
before show time.
Outside, on the Boardwalk,
the protesters were burning
Bert Parks in effigy.
Parks was unfazed.
When he got wind that one of
the demonstrators was planning
to infiltrate the pageant finals
that evening,
he didn't miss a beat.
"I'll grab her by the throat,"
he said,
"and keep right on singing."
PARKS:
♪ So don't ever stop seeking ♪
♪ Don't ever let down. ♪
♪ Till you you've found
your future ♪
♪ Till you've captured
your crown. ♪
NARRATOR:
Judy Ann Ford, an 18-year-old
gymnast from Illinois
was the first blonde in 11 years
to be crowned Miss America.
"I'm so glad," she gushed
to the press that evening.
"I feel like
it's a breakthrough."
Meanwhile, just four blocks
from Convention Hall
at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel,
another ideal
was about to be chosen.
MALE CHORUS:
♪ Miss Black America...
we're so proud of you... ♪
NARRATOR:
Calling itself
a "positive protest,"
the Miss Black America Pageant
had been scheduled to begin
at midnight
in the hopes that newsmen
would drop by
when they left Convention Hall.
It was nearly
3:00 in the morning
before 19-year-old Philadelphian
Saundra Williams was crowned.
MEN:
♪ Miss Black America... ♪
NARRATOR:
"Miss America does not represent
us," Williams told the audience.
"With my title, I can show black
women they, too, are beautiful."
ROSE:
Miss Black America is,
of course, an effort to say
"Well, look, trying to be
like a white person
is not what's at stake,
but appreciating what is black
is quite important."
So Essence magazine emerges.
"Black is beautiful," afros,
you know,
black women emphasizing
that which is black
as beautiful.
And so this was a way of saying,
"We exist as both a market
and as a kind of esthetic"
really begins to take place
in the late 1960s
and gets even stronger
in the late-'70s and '80s.
NARRATOR:
All the controversy of 1968
took its toll on Miss America.
And before the year was out,
Pepsi Cola, a sponsor of
the pageant for over 11 years,
withdrew its support.
"Miss America as run today,"
the company declared,
"does not represent the changing
values of our society."
Society was swirling around it
but the Miss America pageant
stayed the same,
continuing to worship
an outmoded ideal.
In fact, the powers that be
at the pageant never did learn.
They never did learn.
They didn't because they regard
the Miss America pageant
as sacrosanct.
The Miss America pageant
had developed a formula.
The formula worked, and
nobody wanted to change it.
You know,
often I've heard it said
"Is Miss America
relevant today?"
Well, is personal achievement
relevant?
Is scholarship?
Is good citizenship relevant?
We think it is.
And we think it will be
for a long time to come.
NARRATOR:
The Miss America Pageant still
drew an enormous audience
reaching a peak, in 1970,
of over 22 million households.
But then the ratings
started to slip
and the pageant
was finally forced
to catch up with the times.
Presenting Cathy Clough,
Lisa Donovan
and a good friend, and former
Miss America, Phyllis George
with a comment
on a very timely subject.
Women, tell it like it is.
( music begins playing )
♪ I can fly your plane,
I'll even carry your bags... ♪
♪ I can clear your drain,
fix your roof if it sags... ♪
♪ But let me make one thing
perfectly clear ♪
♪ Don't call me "honey"
and don't call me "dear"... ♪
ALL:
♪ There's only one little word
that we're waiting to hear ♪
♪ I want you to call me... ♪
♪ I said call me... ♪
♪ But when you call me... ♪
♪ Call me Ms. ♪
STEINEM:
It just seemed as if they were
just trying to keep the lid on.
You know, they were just hoping
against hope that...
that somehow there wouldn't be
too many demonstrations
or that the contestants wouldn't
stand up and, uh, raise a fist.
You know, somehow the people
who ran the pageant
were trying desperately
to preserve it.
♪ I said if you want me,
you gotta call me ♪
♪ But when you call me... ♪
♪ Call me Ms. ♪
( music winding down )
NARRATOR:
The time had come for
a new-style Miss America
and in 1973,
the pageant found one
in an aspiring attorney
from Denver, Colorado
named Rebecca Ann King.
KING:
I started watching the Miss
America Pageant as a young girl
and I wasn't really sure that
it was the kind of young woman
that I was going to be,
because I knew I was going to be
President of the United States
someday.
The young women looked
a little Barbie-dollish to me.
They looked a little
too made- up,
a little too "world peace,"
and I just didn't think
I was that kind of young woman.
NARRATOR:
King was finishing up
her senior year
at Colorado Women's College,
when a friend tried to talk her
into entering
the Miss America Pageant.
I said, "What's in it for me?"
She said,
"There's scholarship money
so you can go on to law school."
And so I said,
"Okay, I'll think about it,
but don't tell anybody."
( music playing quietly )
ANNOUNCER:
Rebecca Ann King, Miss Colorado.
During the past 23 years, my
grandmother often said to me
that the character of a nation
is determined by its womanhood.
Through the practice of law,
I hope to make a productive
contribution to mankind,
and find the happiness
of a fulfilled woman.
DREMAN:
I was really in it
for the money.
And I think
it shocked the pageant
that I said
I was in it for the money.
I didn't think
it was strange at all.
I said, "What is it, it's
a scholarship program, right?
Isn't that what we're here for?"
PARKS:
The winner
of a $15,000 scholarship
and our new Miss America,
Rebecca Ann King,
Miss Colorado!
( cheering and applause )
PARKS:
Any words
for your subjects?
Very surprised.
Very surprised
and, undoubtedly,
very happy.
Thank you very much.
The new Miss America,
here she comes!
( Miss America theme playing )
DREMAN:
I didn't
fall apart as Miss America;
Walked over, got the crown on.
And I think my mother received,
hmm, maybe 100 letters
because I didn't cry.
"She didn't cry.
"What kind of Miss America
do we have here on our hands
walking down the runway
not crying?"
NARRATOR:
For most Americans,
the real surprise came later,
when the new Miss America
began speaking to the press
and came out in favor
of legalized abortion.
DREMAN:
It was right at the time
of Roe v. Wade.
I thought a woman ought
to have the right to choose
whether to continue
with a pregnancy or not.
And, um... it just...
blew completely up
and the pageant
never said not talk about it.
PEISS:
Well, the Miss America Pageant
in the 1970s
is faced with the growing
politicization of women
on both the left and the right.
And one of the key moments,
of course,
is the Roe v. Wade Supreme Court
decision in 1973.
So when Miss America comes out
as pro-choice,
inserting a political stand
in the pageant,
which had always seen itself
as nonpolitical or apolitical,
it really is
an important moment.
DREMAN:
The pageant has always been
a little behind the times,
but it was definitely the '70s.
It was time for people to move
on, and the pageant was trying.
ALL:
♪ Moving on... ♪
♪ We've got to be moving on... ♪
NARRATOR:
The national press applauded
Miss America's new image.
Even feminists, who had been
protesting against the pageant
for half a decade,
now called off their war
and invited King to speak
at the National Organization
for Women's annual convention.
Still, Miss America's television
audience continued to shrink,
edged out by competition
from new cable networks
and dismissed by younger viewers
as old-fashioned.
( rock music playing )
HORN:
I think that a large number
of people
began not watching
the Miss American Pageant
probably about the mid-70s.
The ideals upon which the Miss
America pageant appeared to rest
no longer seemed
very exciting or relevant.
And I think we lost
a generation of people.
( fast music playing )
NARRATOR:
By the late 1970s,
pageant organizers
were desperate for viewers
and casting about
for ways to update the show,
so they decided
to fire Bert Parks,
Miss America's
master of ceremonies
for a quarter of a century.
It was later reported
that the pageant's sponsors
considered 65-year-old Parks
too old and too out of touch.
The decision caused
such an uproar
that Tonight Show
host Johnny Carson
even held an on-air campaign
to get Parks reinstated.
The pageant replaced him anyway.
But a new host
did not bring new viewers.
ROSE:
I was a teenager
in the late '70s,
and I, um... my recollection
of the pageant
was that it just...
being a New Yorker
it just didn't seem to reflect
what the city looked like to me.
So the pageant was a sort
of helpful travelscape for me
like, oh, this is what women
look like in Texas and Florida.
I was pretty much sure
that the most blonde was going
to be in the top two
if not the number one slot.
If a brunette was going to win,
it was because of some other
extraordinary traits
that were compensating,
but I very much understood it
as a tall, blonde, you know,
Southern women's festival.
PARKS:
Miss Tennessee.
CHO:
My father was very into it.
And then, at one point
when I was a little girl,
I said, "I want to be
one of those contestants.
I want to grow up and do that."
And he said, "No, oh, no,
you cannot do that, no."
You know, like...
And I took it to mean
that the beauty pageant
was not open to all women.
I mean, my father thought
that this whole pageant
was fascinating
and we would pick out the
winners, but I was not allowed
to even entertain the fantasy
of becoming one of these women.
And I thought, "Maybe
I'm just not pretty enough.
Or maybe I'm just not white."
I remember always sitting
in front of the television
watching the Miss America
every single year
when I was a little kid,
and I was the only one watching.
Everybody else
kind of went to bed,
and I would be so excited.
"Mom, I chose
the first runner up
or the second runner up."
But the interesting thing
about that,
I always kind of saw myself
on stage as well,
although no one looked like me;
there was no one
who looked like me.
( music playing )
PARKS:
Miss Iowa.
NARRATOR:
20-year-old Cheryl Brown,
Miss Iowa 1970,
had been the first
African-American woman
ever to compete
in Atlantic City.
( applause )
In the decade that followed,
there had been just
ten other black contestants
and of those, only one
had made the top five:
Lencola Sullivan,
Miss Arkansas 1980.
SULLIVAN:
I made history that night by
being the first black woman
to ever make top five
in the Miss America Pageant.
And even though
that was wonderful,
of course, I was sad that
I didn't make it to the top
and didn't walk away with the...
the title of Miss America.
ANNOUNCER:
Fourth runner-up and winner
of a $5,000 scholarship is...
SULLIVAN:
That was actually one of the
questions that was asked of me
when I competed, was
"Is America ready for a black
woman to become Miss America?"
And I said, "If Arkansas
is ready, America is ready,"
but, obviously,
America wasn't ready.
NARRATOR:
But in 1983, the 61st year
of the Miss America Pageant,
everything suddenly changed.
( sultry music playing )
♪ Happy days are here again ♪
♪ The skies above
are clear again... ♪
ANNOUNCER:
And our new Miss America
is Vanessa Williams,
Miss New York!
( cheering and applause )
WILLIAMS:
♪ Happy days are here again... ♪
NARRATOR:
A 20-year-old musical theater
major at Syracuse University,
Williams had entered the pageant
in the hope of breaking
into show business.
Like so many Miss Americas
before her,
she wanted to be a star.
But first, she would become
a political symbol.
WILLIAMS:
♪ The skies above
are clear again ♪
♪ So let's sing a song... ♪
NARRATOR:
To some, the crowning
of a black Miss America
was a milestone in the struggle
against bigotry.
"Thank God I have lived
long enough,"
said Congresswoman
Shirley Chisholm,
"that this nation
has been able to select
the beautiful young woman
of color to be Miss America."
WILLIAMS:
♪ Again... ♪
( applause )
WOMAN:
That was the first time I
remember watching Miss America,
and I remember her singing,
I remember her performance,
I remember her being crowned,
and I remember thinking,
"Wow, she looks like me."
I had never at that point,
I had heard of Miss America,
but I had never at that point
thought that Miss America
was something that was for me
or something that I could do.
I think everybody
was shocked, excited
and just looking forward
to having a year
where there was a Miss America
that was black
and would get to do
all the great things
that every other Miss America
had ever done.
So I think it was just a time
of excitement and anticipation.
NARRATOR:
Williams' fans made her the most
heavily-booked Miss America
in the pageant's history.
Not quite ten months
into her reign,
she had already earned
a record $125,000 in fees.
I remember talking
to some pageant people
and they said that the best
Miss America they ever had
was Vanessa Williams.
She was just sensational.
She was just the most verbal,
bright, terrific seller
of the Miss America contest
they'd ever had.
NARRATOR:
But there were those
who considered
Williams' victory an affront.
For the first time,
Miss America received
death threats and hate mail.
When she made appearances
in the south,
armed guards had to be posted
at her hotel room door.
And even in
the African-American community,
there were
those who assailed her
for not being "black" enough.
Then, in July of 1984,
Williams was informed
that an unauthorized pictorial,
featuring explicit nude photos
she had posed for
two years earlier,
was about to be published
in Penthouse magazine.
Pageant officials
were quick to respond.
We do not believe under the
content and spirit of the rules,
as well as the contracts as well
as the image of Miss America,
that she should remain
Miss America
and still give
this particular program
the vitality and the respect
to which it's entitled.
If you don't
draw the line here,
where do you
draw the line?
HORN:
The sponsors were waiting
on the sidelines.
We had received a warning that
if we didn't handle this right,
they were going to pull out.
If they'd pulled out
at the end of July,
there would've been no money and
no Miss America Pageant in 1984.
And there would not be
a Miss America Pageant today.
That's how close we came.
NARRATOR:
Williams was given
72 hours to resign.
She would be allowed
to keep her scholarship
and the money she had earned,
but her title would be given
to the first runner-up,
Suzette Charles.
WOMAN:
It is one thing to face up to a
mistake that one makes in youth.
But it is almost totally
devastating to have to share it
with the American public
and the world at large
as both a human being
and as Miss America.
I put the session
in the back of my mind
and believed the photos would
never be used for any purpose,
as the photographer
had verbally assured me.
I never consented
to the publication
or the use of these photographs
in any manner.
NARRATOR:
It was the first time in
the pageant's six-decade history
that a Miss America
was asked to give up her crown.
COCKERHAM:
I think a lot of people
were very disappointed.
And I think
any minority community
looks to their role models
that are so accepted
and are so loved by everybody
as a point of,
you know, inspiration,
and maybe at that point it is,
you are let down,
that, okay, these
are choices that she made
that have caused a lot
of embarrassment
to her and her family,
but also to the black community.
ROSE:
I do remember feeling, you know,
incredibly sorry for her.
I just felt that she
was carrying the weight
of this whole history of vicious
stereotypes about black women,
and simply by trying
to win the pageant,
she was, in a sense,
trying to counter
many of those stereotypes.
And then, you know,
to have these pictures emerge
to undermine it
was, you know, probably
the most vicious way to have it,
because, you know,
I would be stunned
if she was
the first pageant contestant
to have tried
to raise money as a model
by doing
these kinds of pictures.
I would be really shocked.
But I wouldn't be surprised
if people were more interested
in finding hers to undermine it
because she, in a sense,
by definition,
threw the rest of the
contestants into stark relief.
NARRATOR:
The Vanessa Williams issue
of Penthouse
would ultimately bring in
over $20 million,
the magazine's all-time,
single-issue sales record.
CHO:
You know, what's
great about it is
that she's the only Miss America
that anybody remembers,
and she's the only one
that ever really became a star.
And... and... uh, that is
what's really great,
is that she has the most
"Kiss my ass" story--
that... that you can
triumph over anything.
So she's certainly
a big hero of mine.
NARRATOR:
For a time, the scandal
revived public interest
in the Miss America Pageant,
and ticket sales for the 1984
finals rose by 20%.
That night, after only
two months as Miss America,
Suzette Charles walked
the Convention Hall runway
to a standing ovation
before crowning her successor,
20-year-old Sharlene Wells,
a tall, blonde Mormon
whom USA Today described
as "squeaky-clean."
EMCEE:
♪ Miss America... ♪
( applause and cheering )
CHORUS:
♪ I can fly, I can fly,
I can fly, I can fly... ♪
NARRATOR:
Confronted now by
the possibility of scandals
that Lenora Slaughter
never could have imagined,
pageant directors drew up
a new contestant contract,
gradually adding
dozens of regulations
to which potential Miss Americas
were subject.
CHORUS:
♪ I can fly! ♪
WOMAN:
That you've always
been female, is one.
Isn't that hilarious?
You have to sign
a contract saying,
"I've always been female."
There's a clause in the contract
that you have never
posed in the nude.
There's also a clause
that you can't
be the natural
or adoptive parent of a child.
And then there
is a clause in the contract
that you have never
done anything
that could possibly
be interpreted as illegal,
immoral, unethical, whatever.
And, you know,
everybody signs the contract,
but who didn't cheat
on a second grade math test?
NARRATOR:
With the changes in the contract
came a renewed campaign
to portray Miss America
as a "thinking woman,"
who would make a positive
contribution to society.
In 1989,
pageant officials introduced
a new competitive element
called "the platform,"
which required contestants
to demonstrate
an ongoing commitment
to a social problem
and to back it up
with community service.
Hello from the Sunshine State.
I'm devoted to promoting unity
through the celebration
of our cultural diversity.
I am devoted
to encouraging youth
to postpone
their sexual activity.
My personal commitment
is to child abuse prevention
through my program, TRUST.
SHINDLE:
One of those things
people love to make fun of.
"I'd love to...
I support world peace
and I want to give
everyone a flower."
During my year as Miss America,
because I was talking
about AIDS, which was something
that people don't necessarily
associate with the conservative,
white bread, grass roots,
Miss America organization,
it got a lot of media attention.
I took some flack for talking to
students about sexual activity,
certainly about abstinence,
but also about safer sex.
There are people who don't want
you to come to their high school
and say things like that.
But I will tell you that Miss
America got me so much access.
The fact that I was
invited to speak
at middle and high schools
in middle America
where they would never,
never invite an AIDS activist to
come and speak to their kids--
but they'll roll out
the red carpet for Miss America
and hope she brings her crown--
was an enormous part
of what I felt was effective
during that year.
ANNOUNCER:
Live, from Atlantic City,
ABC proudly presents
"Miss America."
( cheering and applause )
WOMAN:
I would love
for everyone to join hands
and we'll say a little prayer.
NARRATOR:
More than 80 years
after the first contest
was held in Atlantic City,
the Miss America Pageant
still endures.
WOMAN:
We come here in friendship,
one in community
and one in service...
NARRATOR:
It is one of the longest-running
television programs
in American history, seen
by more than a billion people
since its first broadcast
in 1954.
It is also the single largest
scholarship organization
for women in the world.
Each year,
1,200 state and local pageants
are franchised by
the Miss America Organization.
And each year,
more than 10,000 young women
enter those contests,
all of them hoping
Miss America's crown
will change their lives.
So with that
in Jesus' name we pray.
Amen.
Go, girls,
you go out there
and get them,
all right?
( applause and cheers )
Good luck.
MAN:
One minute folks.
One minute to air.
WOMAN:
60 seconds.
( percussion thundering )
( contestants cheering )
COCKERHAM:
I think every contestant
that comes to Miss America
has a different agenda.
Some contestants come there
because they want to be
discovered by a modeling agency
or they want to go into acting
or broadcasting.
Many contestants go because
of their social activism.
Many contestants go
just because they have this idea
of Miss America with the crown
walking down the runway.
( up-tempo instrumental version
of "Miss America" playing )
( applause and cheering )
WOMAN:
I would love to be
your next Miss America.
It would give me the opportunity
to represent
many wonderful people.
It would also enable me
to further my education
at Sacramento State College.
It would give me the opportunity
to meet many wonderful people
which I wouldn't otherwise
have the opportunity of meeting.
It would also considerably
broaden my outlook on life.
I would love to be
your next Miss America.
( cheering and applause )
CHO:
I think that women's roles
have changed so much
in the last 20 years,
that we are constantly looking
for the outside world
to tell us who we are.
We really search
for this "for-sure" identity,
for this "for-sure"
being of who we are,
and the pageant is one way
of defining ourselves.
GOLDMAN:
I wonder, I don't know.
Do little girls now
of six and seven
dream of being Miss America?
I don't know.
Or do they dream
of replacing Bill Gates?
I have no idea.
BANET-WEISER:
It's not you either love it
or you hate it,
it's not
it's either good or bad.
It just doesn't fit that neatly
into one of those boxes.
I think that what civic rituals
do is that they are stories
that we tell ourselves
about ourselves.
And I think
that along with considering
the Miss America Pageant
as popular culture,
we needed to consider it
as about imagining citizenship
and imagining, who we are, why
we're here, and what we're for.
There's more
about "Miss America"
at American Experience Online.
Explore the pageant
and women's roles in society,
decade by decade
and screen memorable moments
from the pageant
over the years.
All this and more
at PBS Online.
aA>s÷p American Experience
????X

is made possible by the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
to enhance public understanding
of the role of technology.
The foundation also seeks
to portray the lives
of the men and women engaged
in scientific
and technological pursuit.
At the Scotts Company, we help
make gardens more beautiful
lawns greener, trees taller.
If there's a better business
to be in
please... let us know.
Liberty Mutual Insurance
is a proud supporter
of The American Experience.
And by helping people live
safer, more secure lives
we are also proud supporters
of the American dream.
This program has been made
possible by a grant
from the National Endowment
for the Humanities.
And by the New Jersey Council
American Experience
is also made possible
by the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting.
And contributions
to your PBS station from: